Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you for sticking around for the very last talk of the day here.
Okay. Thank you again for coming. My name is Noam Ross. I'm Executive Director of rOpenSci,
and I'm going to be speaking about our rOpenSci Champions program and how we build communities
of open-source leaders. I want to say from the start, I have the privilege of being the
director of an organization, which also means that mostly I get to talk a lot about other
people's work. This work in particular has been led by our spectacular community manager,
Shani Sabine. And so I'll be talking about some of the work that I've done, but the work that
she's very much facilitated through our organization. First, I want to give you a
little background about rOpenSci, what our goals and values are. rOpenSci was founded in
2011. It's a nonprofit organization. Our goal is to foster a culture that values open,
collaborative, and reproducible research using shared data and reusable methods. And we do that
by building both the technical and social infrastructure in the R language that's
needed to enable that open science in a welcoming and diverse community. And I feel like, you know,
in these times, it's really important to emphasize that last part. The diversity, equity, inclusion,
and accessibility of our community is both a core value of the open science we do, that that science
is accessible to everybody, and it's a key instrument of our goals, and that we need it
in order to accomplish the science that we want to do. We have a number of different program areas.
The first one being software peer review, which we've been doing for 12 years. It's a program
where people can contribute code to be reviewed by peers. We run a number of different sort of
technological platform programs. The marquee one these days is rUniverse, which is our R package
hosting and publishing platform. We have a number of projects in multilingualism and translation,
providing resources in multiple languages and tools to enable that type of translation, both
guides and packages and automated translation facilitation tools. We run community events,
hackathons, community calls, co-working times to facilitate the community to do our work,
and then finally we do training and mentorship, and that's really what I'm going to focus on today.
So we do all of these things to support open source science. Open source science is a certain
area of software development with its unique challenges, and people who support open source
scientific projects have a number of challenges that they report when they are managing those
over time. Those challenges are really in the social realm. They have to deal with burnout,
dealing with funding issues, dealing with leadership and community development issues,
stability, how they manage their communities, the internal communication, the external communication.
People report that these are the challenges that cause their software packages and their
projects to stutter and fail over time, and we want to think about how we can facilitate
overcoming those challenges for scientific developers.
Some of the things that, you know, when interviewed, scientific developers have said about
what it takes to sustain their work. They say, I just don't have enough time to do all the things
that I want to do because they require a level of expertise that is difficult to teach, and I
haven't been able to easily recruit people to continue the work. Or it takes longer than a year
to develop people to move into leadership. The hardest part is finding the right person
and having the time to invest in mentorship. So succession and mentorship, recruiting
co-maintainers are a key challenge to sustaining scientific software.
Scientific software also has a problem of scale. Most tools developed in the scientific sphere
are part of what we call the long tail of scientific software. There are sort of mega packages,
be they commercial or scientific, the Tidyverse and SciPy, but most tools are small and niche
and essential to specific communities but don't necessarily have the scale of other
open source software packages. They're developed to meet a knowledge need, not necessarily a market,
so they don't go into a place that has scale. The teams that develop them are often not full-time
developers. They are small and they are splitting their time between development and research.
They may have user communities that scale with the success of the project, so the user community
grows, but the funding resources and the size of the team does not necessarily grow with the scale
of the user community, and if that team is small, it doesn't necessarily have the critical mass
for the learning cultures that, you know, we all learned about this morning from Cat.
So that size is a real challenge, and one thing that we deal with a great deal is that these small
projects have a high risk of maintainer loss and abandonment because when you're dealing with a
project that has one, two, or three people and they reach a stage of burnout or a new job or a graduation
or other challenges, you have this possibility that you're going to lose a maintainer and the
remaining maintainers are zero or aren't capable of moving it forward, so a lot of the work we do
in our OpenSci and our broader package developer community is trying to recruit those maintainers
in, trying to bring someone into a project so that early enough or after the fact so it can
continue when it needs to. So we have many of these challenges. These challenges are heavily driven by
the scale of these software projects. They're small but important. So what do we do when we have a
challenge of lots of small teams that have a problem of scale by the limits of their size? Well,
there's a book I really liked as a kid about Swimmy, right? Swimmy is the eye of this fish, this fish
right here, and Swimmy's insight, which is the insight that everyone spoke about in this room and
is here as they know, is that you can do things together better that you can't alone, right?
A small fish may not be able to do something that a big fish can, but a lot of small fish can, right?
You make an open source project together, you join a club, you join the community garden, you form a
union together, you're able to accomplish things together. But when the context, when our unit of
our small fish is a small software development team, what is the big fish that we form together?
And that big fish is a community of practice. Community of practices are groups of people who
share a passion for something that they know how to do and who interact regularly in order to learn
how to do it better, how to support each other. Everyone in this room, in this conference, form
a community of practice of R. R Bensai is working to build communities of practice specific to the
open source scientific challenge. So our question is how do we foster that community of practice
that has both the social and technical skills needed to sustain that scientific open software?
All of our programs cover this, but the one that really addresses it most directly
is our community champions program where we build leaders for open source science, specifically
building those combinations of skills. So the R Bensai champions program is a 12-month
part-time cohort-based fellowship where participants come together to learn those
skills on contributing to and forming communities of practice, both together and with one-on-one
mentorship from other R Bensai members. So I'll talk a bit about the pieces that
we have for this program and how and why we implement them.
So the first thing that is the principle of our design of the champions program is to recruit for
and design for maximum accessibility for historically underrepresented groups. So the
capacity to do this work is everywhere, but the circumstances where people are able to participate
is not and is the limiting factor. And both because expanding that limiting factor is what's
going to enable us to have more open source scientific maintainers and because expanding
that limiting factor is the moral imperative in open science, we really prioritize making
sure this program is accessible as broadly as possible. So part of that is a very active
recruitment program where we partner with affinity groups, with local R user groups,
do a great deal of outreach with ambassadors and academics in different parts of the world
to make sure that people can know about this program, and then we hold information sessions
during the recruitment phase so people who may not be used to such programs or used to
applying to such programs can learn about what it means and what they need to do to apply.
We're very proud of how broad that is able to reach. In our last phase, we had applicants from
the first phase, we had applicants from over 55 countries. I'm not actually sure how many we have
for a more recent one. Then we really prioritize in the design of the project accessibility,
support, and safety. So accessibility is very broad. One of the accessibility
topics that we think about a lot is language. So while in our first two cohorts were English,
but we think very carefully about the design of making sure it's broadly accessible in English,
in our cohort this year, we're running our first all Spanish training program. That's going to
repeat and we're thinking about how do we expand that to focus on more languages and regions.
This is a supported program. It took a lot of effort to go to funders and say what we wanted
to do is give people stipends to participate because we have heard that that is a really
important step in them being able to spend time from their job at this. So we're able to provide
stipends for this for both participants and in cases where mentors where they need it as well.
And we think about accessibility from a disability's perspective and safety and
making sure that people understand that they have a safe space, they have a code of conduct,
they have everything they need to be able to participate fully. And then all of those things
are something that we subject to regular inquiry and feedback and multiple times during the course
of the yearlong program we go back to our champions and we say what's working and what's not,
what do you have a challenge to participation that we can work on as well. We focus on that
very heavily. Then the core is that the design of the program is to teach the skills of
collaborative software development first and that development and maintenance work in the context
of an open source community. So everything we teach is about the collaborative interactive
component of technology development. All of our champions have experience with R, experience
with data science, lots of career experience in their different fields of expertise. So what we
really focus on is this participation. So on one hand we cover our package development. That's
something that some learners know and others don't. But it's sort of the core that we build around.
But then the lessons that we work on are on building software together which are essentially
team collaboration techniques. We talk about code style best practices. How do you develop so
something is readable and maintainable by others and can be picked up in that way? How do you do
peer review of software of others? There's code review which is part of the team building practice
but ROpenSci also does what we call peer review which is the practice of reviewing and giving
feedback to other people's code, other people's projects. How do you give effective feedback? How
do you do reviewing and enter a code base that you're not familiar with so that you can provide
useful information? We have sessions on contributing to other open source projects. So in our last
cohort we had Heather Turner who runs RDevDays for contributing to RCore itself, how people can
participate in that. And then we go beyond sort of these particular technical topics because we're
thinking about developing people as leaders within their open source communities. So we talk about
organizing events. If you're going to have a hackathon or bring together maintainers, hold a
webinar about the thing that you're building, how do you organize an effective event? How do you do
public speaking at those events? How do you do communication with your team projects? You know,
an open source maintainer in a small project has a lot of hats to wear and we know that it goes
beyond just the code. How does this work in practice? Well, so the collaborative teamwork, we
think of collaborative first Git. Some people learn Git, say first Git's a version control system,
here's a bunch of Git commands and you get like the first bit, but Git is first a collaboration
tool and teaching it as a collaboration tool is the way we design our lessons. This is our current
version of that lesson, actually written by one of our first cohorts champions, Parker Ellis, and then
we do peer-to-peer code review because some people join in order to develop code, some people join
in order to review and practice contribution, and so we will match them up and so people are able
to do that code review for each other. Those collaborative skills are what we're building.
The next thing we do is this is project-based and the reason it's project-based is partially to
build skills and build confidence, but it's as much for us because what we want to do
is empower people as peers within our community. I'm not looking in this program to find the
person who is going to do the work for my package. I am looking to develop a peer who has a project
that I am interested in contributing to so that we have a mutual and equal exchange. So the projects
that people create are not toy projects. These are things that have lasting and important impact
in their open source communities. So we have a lot of participation of people from ministries
and national statistical agencies, from research institutions. So here's an example. We have a
package that is a processing package for the Argentine census data, which did not exist in a
standardized form year to year prior to development, which has rapidly become an important tool in
Argentine population and demographic science. Similarly, tools for Brazilian transport systems.
You know, we have a global project. We have an ornithology team in Taiwan that makes a great
deal of use of the Taiwan-British bird survey package. So these are
important projects. We're recruiting important projects as well as champions so that what they
build is something that is of lasting value and attracts its own maintainers.
One thing we do a lot in the program is evaluate and iterate on this design to improve it. So we
have a great partnership with the Center for Scientific Collaboration and Community Engagement,
and that may be the first time that I got its acronym right on the first time. Or I might have
gotten it wrong. I'm not sure. So every year we go back and we interview our champions and our
mentors. We conduct a survey and evaluation to understand what worked and what didn't. That also
enables us to collect a lot of mission that helps us communicate about the program and the program's
value. And what we're really trying to understand when we do these evaluations is not just did people
like this? Did people's skills improve? That's nice. We want to know are communities of practice
forming as a result of this work? And are those communities impactful? So we ask
survey questions and we ask free form questions to hear from people what they are getting out of
the program and what is resulting. So we have things like this. The feedback and interest
are received from other participants and mentors gave me the confidence and motivation to continue
improving it in this package. If I were wanting to transform national data into something useful
for the wider public. So we're getting that community activity happening and we are getting
the impact as a result of the activity. And then we interview the mentors. Because as I say,
our goal is to create peers, not students or apprentices. And so what do the mentors say?
Being part of a cohort makes people feel they belong to a larger community. I learned from my
mentee, too. That's us accomplishing our goals. Now, the challenge of the program is we only have
so many people, so many cohorts. We run two ten-person cohorts a year. There's a limit to
that impact. And so we want to think about how it multiplies. And so part of the design of the
program is in identifying and cultivating leadership in Unchampions. We select people
who have leadership potential in their local communities, right? And we encourage activities
to facilitate that. We ask everyone who participates to do something in the realm of
giving a talk, running a workshop in their city, in their university, in their agency, thinking
about how to bring these practices to a larger group beyond the ten people. Because we just don't
want our OpenSci participants to expand our community of practice. We want to build these
community of practices and networks wider, which means we have a reach into all of those places.
And this has been spectacular. So one of our champions founded the R User Group for Rosario
in Argentina. There is now a continuous user group in that city as a result of this. We have people
doing international work for meetups through the international affinity groups, giving talks within
their agencies about how they can use these packages, how they develop, how people can
contribute to them. All of those let us have the impact in creating these communities of practice
well beyond the ones that we run ourselves. So this morning in the keynote, Dr. Hicks gave a
part of her talk where she talked about the metaphor of the plants and the soil, where
the developers are seeds, and the job of a manager is to cultivate the soil in which the seeds grow.
And I think in our context, we have a much bigger field to tend to the soil of,
because what we are trying to do is not just build skills within our team,
but make sure that we are building the community from which our future developers,
maintainers, and leaders are coming. The community of practice is the thing we have to make sure is
rich and fertile for all of those accomplishes to grow out of. So that's it. I very much want to
thank Shani for being the leader of this program. Within ROpenSci, Mel Simon and Stephanie Lesert
are the other big participants in this program. But of course, well beyond the core RopenSci,
I want to thank so much all of the champions and mentors we've had in this program over the few
years. We have several of them in the room today on all sides. They're what makes the success.
And that's it. Thank you all very much. I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you so much. We have a few questions here. So what is the typical experience of experience
backgrounds of folks in the ROpenSci community? Are there ways for high schoolers or college
students learning data science to get involved? I mean, there's certainly a place that the typical
experience of champions tends to be early and mid-career. We have a lot of people who are like
well into research or other data science career that they're in. We have had high schoolers
participate in ROpenSci. I think we've had a couple of examples. Our software peer review,
our hackathon projects, they're all open. They're not age limited. I admit we haven't
focused on youth development in it, but we have something called the contributing guide
at ROpenSci. So it's contributing.ropensci.org. And it's actually like a book about all of
different ways to enter into the community of practice. Do you want to sign up to review?
Do you want to join in one of our webathons or hackathons? Do you have one of these other
projects we can contribute to? Do you want to contribute to the platform? All of those
things are widely open, and we do actually get a very wide range of people who participate.
Great. Is ROpenSci affiliated with PyOpenSci? And do you think we're going towards a polyglot
OpenSci in the future? We are very good friends. We have a joint Slack channel where we talk about
collective challenges, and PyOpenSci does a lot of, they have a parallel, they have a similar
software review process, and they do a lot of work in the Python packaging ecosystem to harmonize
and document and help people understand the complexity of the Python packaging world.
They started about three years ago. And so I think we collaborate a lot. We're both able to
do what we do because we have a lot of focused expertise within the organization about the
particulars of the language and the platforms and the communities that have sprung up around.
And so we've talked about, should there be one OpenSci? And we're not sure there should be,
but there's a very tight loop between us. And so people who are interested in one can easily
move between another, and much of the design of, say, the peer review system or the philosophy of
the community is really well aligned between us. Perfect. One last question here. How do we
apply for the program? We will have, and we have an announcement twice or once a year. They're one
year and two cohort years, depending. And we put out an announcement that in addition to our
our website, as I said, we do really heavy recruitment. So we'll go out through a great
many of, you will see it in Latin R and Africa R and the Japan R groups and the global R ladies
groups. And if you're a participant in any of those spaces, it will show up. We're able to do
it pretty loudly. Of course, you can also follow This Is My on our website, any of our social media,
it will show up. We did our last announcement in, it was the late spring that our cohort is now doing
in its first month of training for. And so I would expect the next one is probably going to be
a similar time next year. I think we're going to run two cohorts next year.
Sometime in mid to early spring, we'll probably have the announcement for recruiting them.
Great. Thank you so much.